1
Practical Question 1
a. Fetching the data from xlsx, 
b. Fetching the data from csv , 
c. Fetching the data from json, 
d. Fetching the data from web, 
e. Fetching the data from odatafeed and create a visualization


Practical Question 2
Demonstrate Line Chart, Pie Chart, Bar Chart, and Doughnut Chart using 
Power BI with a sample dataset:
1. Preparing Your Dataset
Using a sales dataset, it might have columns like:
Date (for time-based analysis in a line chart)
Category/Product (for categories to use in pie, bar, and doughnut charts)
Sales/Quantity (numerical data to display on all charts)
2. Importing Data into Power BI
a. Open Power BI and go to Home > Get Data > Excel/CSV (choose 
based on your dataset).
b. Load the dataset and ensure it’s structured correctly in the Power BI 
Data view.
3. Creating Different Chart Types
Line Chart
a. Go to the Report view.
b. In the Visualizations pane, select the Line Chart icon.
c. Drag the Date field to the Axis and the Sales/Quantity field to the 
Values.
d. Customize colors, line thickness, and data labels in the Format pane 
for clarity.
2
Pie Chart
a. Select the Pie Chart icon from the Visualizations pane.
b. Drag the Category/Product field to Legend and Sales/Quantity to 
Values.
c. Format the chart by adjusting colors, adding data labels, and 
adjusting legend positioning as needed.
Bar Chart
a. Select the Clustered Bar Chart or Stacked Bar Chart icon.
b. Drag the Category/Product field to the Axis and Sales/Quantity to 
Values.
c. You can split the bar by adding another field, such as Region or 
Time Period, to Legend for additional insights.
Doughnut Chart
a. Choose the Doughnut Chart icon.
b. Like with the pie chart, drag Category/Product to Legend and 
Sales/Quantity to Values.
c. Customize the inner radius to adjust the doughnut’s thickness.
4. Customizing and Formatting
Use the Format pane to add titles, adjust label placements, change colors, 
and modify fonts to make the charts clear and professional.
5. Interactivity and Filters
Add slicers or filters to allow dynamic interaction with the charts. You 
can create slicers based on Date, Category, or other relevant fields in your 
dataset.
This approach should give a clear visual representation of your dataset 
using various chart types in Power BI. 
Adding slicers and filters in Power BI allows you to interactively control 
what data is displayed across your visuals. Here’s how to set them up:
1. Adding a Slicer
1. In the Report view, go to the Visualizations pane and select the 
Slicer icon (looks like a filter).
2. Drag a field into the slicer to filter by. For example:
3. Date for time-based filtering (you can choose a date range).
4. Category for filtering by product category, region, or any other 
dimension.
5. Customize the slicer by selecting the Format pane:
6. Change Orientation to display the slicer as a list, dropdown, or 
between options.
7. Use Single Select or Multi-Select to control how many options can 
be chosen at once.
8. Place the slicer anywhere on your report page for ease of access.
2. Applying Visual-Level, Page-Level, and Report-Level Filters
Power BI offers different filter types to control the scope of your filtering:
1. Visual-Level Filters: 
a. Apply to only a specific chart or visual.
b. Select a visual you want to filter.
c. In the Filters pane (usually on the right), expand Visual-Level 
Filters.
d. Drag a field (e.g., Category) into this area and specify filter 
conditions (e.g., filtering for specific categories).
2. Page-Level Filters: 
a. Apply to all visuals on a single report page.
b. In the Filters pane, expand Page-Level Filters.
c. Drag a field here to filter all visuals on this page, then set 
conditions (e.g., show only the last month’s data).
3. Report-Level Filters: 
a. Apply to all pages in the report.
b. In the Filters pane, expand Report-Level Filters.
c. Drag a field here to filter across all pages (e.g., filter by a 
specific region).
3
4
3. Syncing Slicers Across Multiple Pages
a. If you want a slicer to affect multiple pages:
b. Go to the View menu > Sync Slicers.
c. Select the slicer you want to sync.
d. In the Sync Slicers pane, choose the pages you want this slicer to 
apply to. This makes the slicer selection consistent across chosen 
pages.
4. Customizing Filters
a. In the Filters pane:
b. Set specific values or conditions for fields (e.g., show only top 10 
categories).
c. Use advanced filtering (e.g., set ranges or text conditions) for 
greater control over filtered data.
5. Testing Interactivity
After setting up slicers and filters, try clicking through different 
selections. Power BI will dynamically update the visuals to reflect your 
selections, making it easy to analyze different data subsets.
This setup helps you create interactive and user-friendly Power BI 
reports. 
Practical Question 3 :
Creating a dashboard in Power BI using multiple datasets can provide a 
comprehensive view of various data sources in one report. Here’s a step￾by-step example of how to create a multi-dataset dashboard, along with 
some useful tips:
Example Scenario: Sales and Customer Satisfaction Dashboard
Assume you have two datasets:
1. Sales Data: Contains sales transactions with columns like Date, 
Product, Region, Sales Amount, and Quantity.
2. Customer Satisfaction Data: Contains survey responses with columns 
like Date, Region, Customer Satisfaction Score, and Comments.
5
How to create a cohesive dashboard from these datasets.
Step 1: Load Data into Power BI
1. Import Datasets:
Go to Home > Get Data > Excel/CSV (or other sources based on where 
your data is stored).
Load both datasets into Power BI and name them accordingly (e.g., 
`SalesData` and `CustomerSatisfaction`).
2. Review and Clean Data:
In Power Query Editor, check for any data cleaning needs (like removing 
null values or adjusting data types).
Make sure both datasets have common fields for potential relationships 
(e.g., Date, Region).
Step 2: Create Relationships Between Datasets
1. Navigate to the Model View (the icon with the tables on the left).
2. Create Relationships:
a. Drag and drop related fields to create relationships between tables. 
In this case:
b. Connect `SalesData[Date]` to `CustomerSatisfaction[Date]`.
c. Connect `SalesData[Region]` to `CustomerSatisfaction[Region]`.
d. Set relationship cardinality (usually “Many to One” or “One to 
Many”) based on the data.
These relationships allow you to filter and aggregate data across tables.
Step 3: Create Visuals for the Dashboard
1. Sales Overview (Using Sales Data)
Line Chart for Sales Trend:
a. In the Visualizations pane, select the Line Chart icon.
b. Drag `Date` to the Axis and `Sales Amount` to the Values to show 
sales trends over time.
Clustered Bar Chart for Regional Sales:
6
a. Choose the Clustered Bar Chart icon.
b. Drag `Region` to the Axis and `Sales Amount` to Values to show 
sales by region.
Customer Satisfaction Overview (Using Customer Satisfaction Data)
a. Gauge or Card for Average Satisfaction Score:
b. In the Visualizations pane, select a Gauge or Card visual.
c. Drag `Customer Satisfaction Score` to the Values field and set 
aggregation to Average.
Pie Chart for Satisfaction Distribution by Region:
a. Select the Pie Chart icon.
b. Drag `Region` to Legend and `Customer Satisfaction Score` to 
Values to visualize satisfaction scores by region.
3. Combined Insights (Using Both Datasets)
a. Scatter Chart for Sales vs. Satisfaction:
b. Select the Scatter Chart icon.
c. Drag `Sales Amount` from the SalesData table to X Axis and 
`Customer Satisfaction Score` from the CustomerSatisfaction table 
to Y Axis.
d. Add `Region` to Legend to compare sales and satisfaction by 
region.
Step 4: Add Slicers for Interactive Filtering
1. Add Date Slicer:
In the Visualizations pane, select the Slicer icon.
Drag `Date` to the slicer to filter the dashboard by specific time frames.
2. Add Region Slicer:
Add another slicer with `Region` so users can filter the entire dashboard 
by region.
7
Step 5: Arrange and Format Your Dashboard
1. Organize Visuals:
Arrange visuals on the report canvas to make the dashboard easy to read. 
Group similar visuals together, like placing sales-related visuals on one 
side and satisfaction visuals on the other.
2. Format for Readability:
Use the Format pane to adjust colors, fonts, titles, and labels for clarity.
Ensure consistent color schemes for similar data points (e.g., use the 
same color for regions across visuals).
Step 6: Publish and Share the Dashboard
1. Publish the report by going to File > Publish > Publish to Power BI 
Service.
2. In Power BI Service, you can pin visuals to a new dashboard for easy 
access.
3. Share the dashboard with others by granting access in Power BI 
Service.
Practical Question 5
1. Basic Sorting in Visuals
• Example: Suppose you have a Bar Chart showing Sales by 
Product Category.
• In the Report View, click on the Bar Chart visual.
• At the top right of the visual, you’ll see a More options (…) button. 
Click on it, and select Sort by.
• Choose the field you want to sort by, like Sales Amount or Product 
Category.
• Sort Order: You can toggle between Ascending and Descending
order by selecting Sort Ascending or Sort Descending.
This allows you to sort the chart by sales amount in either ascending 
(smallest to largest) or descending (largest to smallest) order.
8
2. Sorting by Multiple Columns
• Example: If you want to sort sales data first by Region and then by 
Product Category.
• In Data View, select the Sales Table.
• Go to Modeling > Sort by Column.
• Choose Region as the primary column, and then Product Category
as the secondary column.
• This sorting order will reflect in visuals that use both fields, 
allowing you to display data sorted by region first and then by 
product category within each region.
3. Sorting by Custom Order
If you want to sort by a specific order not based on alphabetical or 
numerical values (like days of the week or months), you’ll need to create 
a Custom Sort Column.
• Example: Sorting by Month Name (e.g., January, February, etc.) 
instead of alphabetically.
• In Data View, add a new column with numeric values representing 
each month (e.g., January = 1, February = 2, etc.).
• Go to Modeling > Sort by Column, and choose your Month Name
field, then select the new numeric column as the sort column.
• Now, visuals using Month Name will display the months in 
calendar order instead of alphabetical order.
4. Sorting with a Hierarchical Structure
You can sort data in visuals that have hierarchical fields (e.g., Year > 
Month > Day).
• Example: If you have a Matrix showing Sales by Year and 
Month, you can sort each level within the hierarchy.
• Select the Matrix visual, and go to the Row headers.
9
• Click the More options (…) next to a specific hierarchy level (e.g., 
Year or Month) to sort by that level’s values.
• Power BI will sort each subcategory (e.g., Months within each Year) 
based on the chosen level.
5. Sorting Tables in Data View
• Example: If you want to sort a Data Table by Sales Amount or 
Customer Name in Data View.
• Go to Data View and select the table.
• Click on the column header (e.g., Sales Amount) to sort the data by 
that column in ascending or descending order.
This sorting is useful for examining raw data without affecting visuals 
directly.
6. Sorting in Tables and Matrices
In Tables and Matrices, you can sort individual columns directly in the 
visual.
• Example: If you have a Table visual with columns like Customer 
Name and Total Sales.
• Click the column header (e.g., Total Sales) to sort the table by that 
column.
• To sort by multiple columns, hold down Shift and click on 
additional column headers. For instance, sort by Region first and 
then by Total Sales within each region.
7. Sorting with a Calculated Column for Dynamic Sorting
Sometimes, you might need to create calculated columns to achieve 
custom sorting based on complex conditions.
• Example: Suppose you want to sort products based on a 
combination of Sales Volume and Customer Satisfaction.
10
• Go to Modeling > New Column, and create a calculated column 
that ranks products based on these factors. For example:
DAX Query :
ProductRank = RANKX(ALL(SalesData), SalesData[Sales Volume] * 
SalesData[Satisfaction Score], , DESC)
Use ProductRank in visuals to control the order based on combined 
criteria.
Using these sorting techniques in Power BI gives you control over the 
display order of data in your reports
11




Practical Question 6
Creating interactive charts and reports in Power BI with filter and 
highlight options allows users to dynamically explore data. Here’s a step￾by-step example of how to do this using a sample dataset:
Example Scenario: Sales and Customer Satisfaction Report
Assume you have a dataset with the following fields:
Date: Date of each transaction
Region: The geographical region
Product Category: Type of product sold
Sales Amount: Amount of sales in dollars
Customer Satisfaction Score: A score from 1 to 5 indicating customer 
satisfaction
How to build an interactive report using this dataset with charts, filters, 
and highlighting features.
Step 1: Load and Prepare Data
1. Import the Dataset:
 In Power BI, go to Home > Get Data > Excel/CSV (or the source of 
your dataset).
 Import and load the dataset. Confirm the data is structured correctly in 
Data View.
2. Set Up Relationships (if using multiple tables):
 If you have multiple tables (like a Sales table and a Customer table), 
make sure relationships are defined in Model View. This will allow 
interaction between data from different tables.
Step 2: Create Interactive Visuals
1. Line Chart for Sales Trend:
 Go to Report View.
 Select the Line Chart icon from the Visualizations pane.
12
 Drag Date to the Axis and Sales Amount to Values.
 This chart will show the trend of sales over time. Users will be able to 
hover over points to see detailed data.
2. Bar Chart for Sales by Region:
 Select the Clustered Bar Chart visual.
 Drag Region to the Axis and Sales Amount to Values.
 This chart shows the sales amount per region, allowing users to compare 
regions side by side.
3. Pie Chart for Product Category Distribution:
a. Choose the Pie Chart visual.
b. Drag Product Category to Legend and Sales Amount to Values.
c. This chart will show the proportion of total sales by product 
category.
4. Gauge for Average Customer Satisfaction:
a. Select the Gauge visual.
b. Drag Customer Satisfaction Score to Values and set it to average.
c. This visual provides a quick glance at the average satisfaction 
score across all data.
Step 3: Add Filters and Slicers
1. Add a Date Slicer:
 In the Visualizations pane, select the Slicer icon.
 Drag Date into the slicer to create a date range filter.
 Format the slicer in the Format pane by changing its orientation to a 
slider or a list, as preferred.
 This will allow users to filter the visuals by a specific time range.
2. Add a Region Slicer:
13
 Add another slicer by selecting the Slicer icon.
 Drag Region into this slicer to enable filtering by region.
 Users can select one or multiple regions to filter all visuals on the report 
page.
3. Add a Product Category Slicer:
a. Add another slicer for Product Category to filter the data by product 
types.
b. Users can filter the entire report by selecting a specific product 
category, which will update all visuals accordingly.
Step 4: Enable Interactivity Between Visuals
By default, Power BI visuals are interactive, meaning that selecting data 
in one visual highlights related data in others. You can customize this 
interactivity for specific visuals:
1. Cross-Filtering and Cross-Highlighting:
a. Click on any visual to activate it.
b. In the top-right corner of the visual, click on the Format icon (the 
paint roller).
c. Under Edit Interactions, you’ll see options like Filter and Highlight
for each visual.
d. Filter: Filters the entire dataset based on the selected data.
e. Highlight: Highlights related data without filtering out other data 
points.
f. For example, if you select a region in the Bar Chart, it will highlight 
that region’s data in the Line Chart without removing other regions.
2. Testing Interactivity:
a. Click on any section in the Pie Chart to highlight that product 
category across other visuals.
b. Try adjusting the Date Slicer to see the line chart and bar chart 
update according to the selected date range.
14
Step 5: Add Drill-Through Capabilities
1. Set Up Drill-Through:
 Create a new report page that shows detailed information. For example, 
you might create a Detailed Sales Report page that includes tables or 
visuals by product or region.
 On this new page, drag Region or Product Category into the Drill￾through filters well in the Fields pane.
 Go back to the main report page, right-click on a data point (e.g., a 
specific region or product category) in any visual, and choose Drill 
through > Detailed Sales Report.
 This will take the user to the detailed report page filtered to that specific 
data point.
Step 6: Format and Arrange Visuals
1. Format Visuals:
a. Use the Format pane to adjust colors, titles, data labels, and fonts 
for each visual to improve readability.
b. Consistent color-coding across visuals (e.g., same color for a 
particular region) enhances the user experience.
2. Arrange Layout:
a. Organize visuals and slicers on the report canvas to make the 
dashboard visually appealing and intuitive.
b. Keep filters and slicers on one side for easy access, and arrange 
charts logically (e.g., trend charts at the top, summary charts 
below).
Step 7: Publish and Share the Dashboard
1. Publish the report by going to File > Publish > Publish to Power BI 
Service.
2. In Power BI Service, you can create a Dashboard by pinning specific 
visuals from the report.
15
3. Share the dashboard by setting permissions for other users, enabling 
them to interact with the data and filters.
Creating interactive charts and reports in Power BI with filter and 
highlight options allows users to dynamically explore data. Here’s a step￾by-step example of how to do this using a sample dataset:
Example Scenario: Sales and Customer Satisfaction Report
Assume you have a dataset with the following fields:
1. Date: Date of each transaction
2. Region: The geographical region
3. Product Category: Type of product sold
4. Sales Amount: Amount of sales in dollars
5. Customer Satisfaction Score: A score from 1 to 5 indicating 
customer satisfaction
How to build an interactive report using this dataset with charts, filters, 
and highlighting features.
Step 1: Load and Prepare Data
1. Import the Dataset:
 In Power BI, go to Home > Get Data > Excel/CSV (or the source of 
your dataset).
 Import and load the dataset. Confirm the data is structured correctly in 
Data View.
2. Set Up Relationships (if using multiple tables):
16
 If you have multiple tables (like a Sales table and a Customer table), 
make sure relationships are defined in Model View. This will allow 
interaction between data from different tables.
Step 2: Create Interactive Visuals
1. Line Chart for Sales Trend:
a. Go to Report View.
b. Select the Line Chart icon from the Visualizations pane.
c. Drag Date to the Axis and Sales Amount to Values.
d. This chart will show the trend of sales over time. Users will be able 
to hover over points to see detailed data.
2. Bar Chart for Sales by Region:
a. Select the Clustered Bar Chart visual.
b. Drag Region to the Axis and Sales Amount to Values.
c. This chart shows the sales amount per region, allowing users to 
compare regions side by side.
3. Pie Chart for Product Category Distribution:
 Choose the Pie Chart visual.
 Drag Product Category to Legend and Sales Amount to Values.
 This chart will show the proportion of total sales by product category.
4. Gauge for Average Customer Satisfaction:
a. Select the Gauge visual.
b. Drag Customer Satisfaction Score to Values and set it to average.
c. This visual provides a quick glance at the average satisfaction score 
across all data.
Step 3: Add Filters and Slicers
1. Add a Date Slicer:
a. In the Visualizations pane, select the Slicer icon.
b. Drag Date into the slicer to create a date range filter.
c. Format the slicer in the Format pane by changing its orientation to 
a slider or a list, as preferred.
d. This will allow users to filter the visuals by a specific time range.
2. Add a Region Slicer:
a. Add another slicer by selecting the Slicer icon.
b. Drag Region into this slicer to enable filtering by region.
c. Users can select one or multiple regions to filter all visuals on the 
report page.
3. Add a Product Category Slicer:
a. Add another slicer for Product Category to filter the data by product 
types.
b. Users can filter the entire report by selecting a specific product 
category, which will update all visuals accordingly.
Step 4: Enable Interactivity Between Visuals
By default, Power BI visuals are interactive, meaning that selecting data 
in one visual highlights related data in others. You can customize this 
interactivity for specific visuals:
1. Cross-filtering and Cross-Highlighting:
a. Click on any visual to activate it.
b. In the top-right corner of the visual, click on the Format icon (the 
paint roller).
c. Under Edit Interactions, you’ll see options like Filter and Highlight
for each visual.
d. Filter: Filters the entire dataset based on the selected data.
e. Highlight: Highlights related data without filtering out other data 
points.
For example, if you select a region in the Bar Chart, it will highlight that 
region’s data in the Line Chart without removing other regions.
2. Testing Interactivity:
a. Click on any section in the Pie Chart to highlight that product 
category across other visuals.
17
b. Try adjusting the Date Slicer to see the line chart and bar chart 
update according to the selected date range.
Step 5: Add Drill-Through Capabilities
1. Set Up Drill-Through:
a. Create a new report page that shows detailed information. 
For example, you might create a Detailed Sales Report page that 
includes tables or visuals by product or region.
b. On this new page, drag Region or Product Category into the Drill￾through filters well in the Fields pane.
c. Go back to the main report page, right-click on a data point (e.g., a 
specific region or product category) in any visual, and choose Drill 
through > Detailed Sales Report.
d. This will take the user to the detailed report page filtered to that 
specific data point.
Step 6: Format and Arrange Visuals
1. Format Visuals:
a. Use the Format pane to adjust colors, titles, data labels, and fonts 
for each visual to improve readability.
b. Consistent color-coding across visuals (e.g., same color for a 
particular region) enhances the user experience.
2. Arrange Layout:
a. Organize visuals and slicers on the report canvas to make the 
dashboard visually appealing and intuitive.
b. Keep filters and slicers on one side for easy access, and arrange 
charts logically (e.g., trend charts at the top, summary charts 
below).
Step 7: Publish and Share the Dashboard
Publish the report by going to File > Publish > Publish to Power BI 
Service. In Power BI Service, you can create a Dashboard by pinning 
specific visuals from the report. Share the dashboard by setting 
permissions for other users, enabling them to interact with the data and 
filters.
18
